# myhzxsim

<!--
## *Cautions: Descriptions below are mostly under construction*
<br>
-->

myhzxsim is an X-ray observation simulator using a wide-field X-ray telescope equipped with a lobster-eye micropore optical system (MPO). Its primary purpose is research and development for astronomical satellite missions, particularly the HiZ-GUNDAM mission.
This software is written in Python and works with the HEASOFT standard X-ray astronomy library. All the codes have been tested on Mac and Linux (Ubuntu) using the Anaconda Python environment.



## Requirements

- Python(tested in version 3.12)
  - numpy, scipy, astropy, matplotlib, ...
  - healpy (https://healpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
  - regions (https://astropy-regions.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
- HEASOFT including PyXspec (tested in version 6.35, 6.36)
- (CALDB)

## How to run
### 1. [Quick start](./doc/Quickstart.md)
### 2. [Extended tutorials](./doc/Tutorials.md)
### 3. [Descriptions of input parameter files](./doc/Parameters.md)

## Major points
### 1. Calibration database (CALDB) files

  CALDB files of telescope definition (TELDEF), response matrix (RMF), ancillary response (ARF), ... are stored in the directory, refdata.
  In the future, these files will be moved to the location given by the  CALDB environment variable. 

### 2. Response functions of Lobster-eye MPO

#### Point Spread Function (PSF)
  myhzxsim employs point response data of Lobster-eye MPO generated by Geant4 X-ray tracing simulations.
  To take account of stray lights coming from X-ray sources located outside of the FOV, the response data is extended to the image region twice larger than the nominal FOV.
  The data is stored in a directory, `simdb/g4evtpsff/`.<br>
  The effects of the support structures, the shadows of the frames and baffles, are calculated for each source position at the later observation simulation phase.<br>
  ***Somoothing***

#### Effective area

### 3. Response functions of (CCD) X-ray imagers
The tentative RMF CALDB is based on those for the eROSITRA pnCCD (ref.). 

### 4. Soft X-ray background emission
  <!-- One default option.  Select the default or none.  -->
  
  Soft X-ray backgrounds consist of unresolved extragalactic sources (mostly AGNs) and Galactic diffuse emissions that are thought to come from local hot bubbles and Galactic halos. 
  Using the [ROSAT all-sky survey data and its background tool (sxrbg) released via HEASARC](https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/Tools/xraybg_help.html), these X-ray spectra are modeled for individual 1x1 deg<sup>2</sup> sky regions pixelized by healpix of Nside = 64 (total 49152 pixels). The extragalactic component is known to be uniform and approximated by a power-law function with a photon index ~ 1.5. 
  The residual Galactic component was fitted with a thin-thermal plasma emission model.
  The obtained model data is stored in simdb/xrbkg_rayspec.fits. It is used in default.

### 5. Non X-ray backgound (NXB)
 
  Non X-ray background (NXB) represents residual cosmic-ray events after discriminating these events with event grades (pixel hit patters), pulse-height upper/lower limits.

  ***The default file is refdata/fake_bkg_exp1e6s.pha***

### 6. X-ray catalog sources
There are two catalog data sets. Choose both, one of them, or neither.

#### MAXI monitoring source<br>
The MAXI team releases daily light curves of ~400 bright variable / flaring sources via the [MAXI home page](http://maxi.riken.jp/). <!--These targets are selected based on daily image. -->
Among them, ~100 objects are constantly detected in a daily time scale.
They are mostly Galactic X-ray binaries embedding black-hole or neutron stars. A half of them are located on the Galactic plane.
These soft X-ray spectra suffer heavy interstellar absorption. <br>
As for these 100 objects, MAXI light curves in 2-4 keV band and spectral models obtained from past observation results are utilized. <br>
The catalog data is stored in a file, simdb/catmxmon.fits.


#### ROSAT all-sky source catalog (2RXS)<br>
2RXS catalog is the latest (last?) release of the ROSAT all-sky source catalogs, including 135,000 sources with ~30% possible spurious detections (Boller+2016). Too bright objects (Sco X-1, …) and regions (Cygnus Vela, ..) are excluded.
The data contains results of spectral fits with power-law, blackbody, and thin-thermal models to bright objects with enough photon statistics (roughly > 100 photons).<br>
In myhzxsim, power-law spectral models are utilized if these model parameters are available.
These catalog data are compiled into a file, simdb/cat2rxs_plparcut.fits.<br>
Some of 2RXS objects are included in the MAXI catalog. In these objects, data in the MAXI catalog is used.


### 7. Auxillary data (satellite attitude and orbit)
  To run simulation, attitude quaternion parameters are required.


### 8. Output file
myhzxsim generates a processed event FITS file. <br>
In addition to TIME, PI, X, Y, DETX, DETY, RAWX, RAWY columns, the output file includes the following optional columns.

<!-- 
| | |
|---|---|
|RA_OBJ  | Source sky position RA in degre (-999. for NXB)|
|DEC_OBJ | Source sky position Dec in degree (-999. for NXB)|
|PHOTON_E | Photon energy in keV   (-1. for NXB)|
| | |
-->